---
tags:
  - Area/Math/Algebra/VectorSpace/InnerProductSpace/RootSpace
---
In this note, we will discuss about the [[Root Space|root space]] and [[Root Space#Positive roots and simple roots|simple roots]]. The main questions to be answered are:
1. To what extend can we uniquely define the simple roots?
2. How can we recover the root space from simple roots?

Let $E$ be a [[Inner Product Space|inner product space]] over [[Field (Math)|field]] $\mathbb{K}$ with inner product $(\cdot,\cdot):E\times E\to \mathbb{K}$. A **root space** $R$ is a finite [[Subset|subset]] of $E-\{ 0 \}$ such that:
1. $R$ generates $E$, i.e. $E=\mathrm{span}_{\mathbb{K}}(R)$.
2. $\forall\alpha,\beta\in R$, the number $n(\alpha,\beta)=2(\alpha,\beta) /(\beta,\beta)$ is an integer.
3. Let $s_{\alpha}:E\to E$ as $$s_{\alpha}(x)=x-\frac{2(\alpha,x)}{(\alpha,\alpha)}\alpha.$$ Then $\forall\alpha,\beta\in R,s_{\alpha}(\beta)\in R$.

Additionally, a root space $R$ satisfying that, if $\alpha,k\alpha$ are both roots then $k=\pm1$, is called a **reduced root space**. In this note we will only consider reduced root space over $\mathbb{C}$.

The number $r=\mathrm{dim}(E)$ is called the **rank** of $R$.

A **[[Morphism|morphism]] of root spaces** is a morphism of [[Vector Space|vector spaces]] $f:E_{1}\to E_{2}$ such that $f(R_{1})=R_{2}$ and $n_{f(\alpha)f(\beta)}=n_{\alpha\beta}$ for any $\alpha,\beta\in R_{1}$.

## Weyl Group
The [[Weyl Group|Weyl group]] $W$ of a root space $R$ is the [[Subgroup|subgroup]] of [[General Linear Group|general linear group]] $\mathrm{GL}(E)$ generated by $s_{\alpha},\alpha\in R$. On geometric aspect, each $s_{\alpha}$ is a reflection w.r.t. the root $\alpha$.

## Positive roots and simple roots
Positive roots are defined through a *regular element* $t\in E$, such that $\forall\alpha\in R, (t,\alpha)\neq0$, i.e. $t$ is not orthogonal with any root. The set of positive roots is
$$R^{+}=\{ \alpha\in R:(\alpha,t)>0 \}.$$
And $R=R^{+}\sqcup R^{-}$ where $R^{-}=\{ \alpha\in R:(\alpha,t)<0 \}$. Such a decomposition of $R$ is called a *polarization* of $R$. Apparently the polarization depends on the choice of $t$.

Start from positive roots, simple roots are positive roots that can not be written as a sum of two positive roots. We denote the set of simple roots by $\Pi \subset R^{+}$.

We have several useful results about simple roots:
>[!lemma] Lemma 1
>Every positive root can be written as a sum of simple roots.

*Proof*. If a positive root $\alpha$ is not simple, it can be written as $\alpha=\alpha'+\alpha''$. Triangular inequality states that $(\alpha',t)<(\alpha,t),(\alpha'',t)<(\alpha,t)$. If any of $\alpha',\alpha''$ is not simple, one may repeat the above decomposition, while the inner product will always decrease. Since $(\alpha,t)$ only takes finite many values, this process will terminate after finitely many steps.

>[!note] Theorem 1
>The simple roots from a basis of the vector space $E$.

*Proof*. Since every root comes in pair, $R^{+}$ spans $E$. Further the simple roots span $R^{+}$, thus $\Pi$ spans $E$. To prove linear independence, one first need to verify that for any two simple roots $\alpha,\beta$, $(\alpha,\beta)\leq 0$. Then the linear independence is easy to be proved from this fact.

## Weyl Chamber
We are now to answer the first question, to what extend can one define the simple roots independently of the regular element $t$. Each root $\alpha$ defines a hyperplane
$$L_{\alpha}=\{ \lambda\in E:(\alpha,\lambda)=0 \}.$$
Then $t\in E- \bigcup_{\alpha\in R}L_{\alpha}$. Moreover, the choice of polarization depends only on the signs of $(t,\alpha)$, thus this gives us a hint to classify the choice. Let us define the **Weyl chambers** $C$ as the set of [[Connected Space|connected components]] of $E-\bigcup_{\alpha\in R}L_{\alpha}$. Then one chamber is defined with a system of inequalities $\pm(\alpha,\lambda)>0$. Any such system either defines an empty set or a Weyl chamber.

One easily sees that there is a bijection between Weyl chambers and polarizations that define positive roots and simple roots. Thus the first part of the answer is that, the number of independent definition of simple roots is equal to the number of Weyl chambers, which is uniquely defined by the root space.

The second part is as the following:
>[!note] Theorem 2
>The Weyl group [[Group Action#Basic concepts|acts transitively]] on the Weyl chambers.

The explicit proof will not be given here, but one can sees the correctness geometrically. We have stated that the elements of Weyl group are reflections w.r.t. the hyperplane $L_{\alpha}$. Any two Weyl chambers $C,C'$ are separated by a hyperplane $L_{\alpha}$, thus they are *adjacent*, as $s_{\alpha}(C)=C'$.

Based on this theorem, one sees that, for two sets of simple roots $\Pi,\Pi'$ of root space $R$, there exists $w\in W$ such that $w(\Pi)=\Pi'$. Our final answer to the first question is that: we can define the simple roots uniquely up to a set of orthogonal transformations, the Weyl group $W$.


## Simple reflections
Now we move to the second question: how to recover the root space from simple roots? The answer is again based on Weyl group.
>[!note] Theorem 3
>Let $R$ be a reduced root space, with a fixed polarization $R=R^{+}\sqcup R^{-}$. Let $\Pi=\{ \alpha_{1},\alpha_{2},\cdots,\alpha_{r} \}$ be the simple roots. Consider reflections corresponding to simple roots $s_{i}=s_{\alpha_{i}}$, then
>1. Weyl group is generated by $\{ s_{1},s_{2},\cdots,s_{r} \}$.
>2. For every $\alpha\in R$, there exists $w\in W,\alpha_{i}\in \Pi$ such that $w(\alpha_{i})=\alpha$.

